# japanese-leaders-need-to-give-up-their-rice-obsession
<!-- wp:paragraph --> <p><strong>Many more people in the country owe their livelihoods to the car industry than to farming</strong>|<strong>Rising prices and poor harvest create political pressure for Prime Minister Shigeru Ishiba ahead of July poll</strong></p> <!-- /wp:paragraph --> <!-- wp:paragraph --> <p></p> <!-- /wp:paragraph --> <!-- wp:paragraph --> <p><em>Please use the sharing tools found via the share button at the top or side of articles. Copying articles to share with others is a breach of <a href="https://www.ft.com">FT.com</a><a href="https://help.ft.com/help/legal-privacy/terms-conditions/">T&amp;Cs</a> and <a href="https://help.ft.com/help/legal-privacy/copyright/copyright-policy/">Copyright Policy</a>. Email <a href="mailto:licensing@ft.com">licensing@ft.com</a> to buy additional rights. Subscribers may share up to 10 or 20 articles per month using the gift article service. More information can be <a href="https://www.ft.com/tour">found here</a>.<br><a href="https://www.ft.com/content/75fe0d39-6511-4146-85d8-53f922bdeb29">https://www.ft.com/content/75fe0d39-6511-4146-85d8-53f922bdeb29</a></em></p> <!-- /wp:paragraph --> <!-- wp:paragraph --> <p>When the financial year ended in March, Japan had completed its 36th straight month with headline inflation above the Bank of Japan’s 2 per cent target. Inflation-adjusted wages fell in each of the first three months of 2025. The word “normalisation” — beloved of monetary policymakers — doesn’t capture just how wrenchingly abnormal all this feels for the average household. </p> <!-- /wp:paragraph --> <!-- wp:paragraph --> <p>And, highlighting that sense of the uncanny, average rice prices have doubled since this time last year, the national strategic rice reserves have been tapped due to distribution issues for the first time ever, and still shoppers have repeatedly experienced temporary shortages of a grain that remains central to the Japanese diet and mindset.</p> <!-- /wp:paragraph --> <!-- wp:paragraph --> <p>Behind the price surge, say some experts, are decades of policy that incentivised farmers to plant less rice as a means of supporting prices. Ishiba’s LDP was the same party that stuck to that plan, rather than encouraging Japan to become a global rice exporting superpower. The fact that the same policy was accompanied by market access limitations on foreign rice imports has supplied an awkwardly timed reminder of why Donald Trump is so convinced of the historic iniquities of Japanese protectionism.</p> <!-- /wp:paragraph --> <!-- wp:paragraph --> <p>But arguably more damning for Ishiba were his comments flatly dismissing the idea that Japan should consider offering greater market access for American rice as an inducement to the Trump administration to spare Japan from the current 25 per cent tariff on automotive imports.</p> <!-- /wp:paragraph --> <!-- wp:paragraph --> <p>The comment was perhaps an attempt by Ishiba to assert his man-of-the-people credentials and his unwavering backing for the farming vote — upon which the LDP has so long depended.&nbsp;What it actually does, though, is reveal a leader who has entirely missed where Japan’s real crisis lies. It is fine to be emotionally defensive around a precious grain, and sensible to be protective of food security in geopolitically and environmentally tormented times. But farming employs roughly a quarter of the number of Japanese who owe their jobs in some form to the automotive industry, which produces by far the country’s most important export.</p> <!-- /wp:paragraph --> <!-- wp:paragraph --> <p>Greater even than the car industry’s importance as a generator of revenue is its centrality as a propellant of innovation, competitiveness, risk-taking and productivity — the only qualities, realistically, that stand to see Japan through a demographic crisis and Trump’s forcible rewriting of global rules. Rice can, and should, be sacrificed if that is what it takes. And if shortages do persist, we all know an ex-minister with plenty to spare.</p> <!-- /wp:paragraph --> <!-- wp:separator --> <hr class="wp-block-separator has-alpha-channel-opacity" /> <!-- /wp:separator --> <!-- wp:paragraph --> <p>Please use the sharing tools found via the share button at the top or side of articles. Copying articles to share with others is a breach of <a href="https://www.ft.com">FT.com</a><a href="https://help.ft.com/help/legal-privacy/terms-conditions/">T&amp;Cs</a> and <a href="https://help.ft.com/help/legal-privacy/copyright/copyright-policy/">Copyright Policy</a>. Email <a href="mailto:licensing@ft.com">licensing@ft.com</a> to buy additional rights. Subscribers may share up to 10 or 20 articles per month using the gift article service. More information can be <a href="https://www.ft.com/tour">found here</a>.<br><a href="https://www.ft.com/content/acc95608-f77e-42e1-af92-b7cc1fef4620">https://www.ft.com/content/acc95608-f77e-42e1-af92-b7cc1fef4620</a></p> <!-- /wp:paragraph --> <!-- wp:paragraph --> <p>Prime Minister Shigeru Ishiba’s government — an administration already unpopular after a near-doubling of domestic rice prices in 2024 — faces an upper-house election in July that analysts forecast will hinge on public dismay over inflation and the price of rice. </p> <!-- /wp:paragraph --> <!-- wp:paragraph --> <p>The average price of a 60kg bag of rice harvested in 2024 has reached an all-time high of more than ¥26,400 ($184). While Japan has not run out of supply, it has yet to recover from a poor 2023 harvest that coincided with an end to Japan’s long deflationary period and retailers’ greater willingness to raise prices. </p> <!-- /wp:paragraph --> <!-- wp:paragraph --> <p>There has also been some hoarding by individuals and deliberate stock withholding by wholesalers. The government has tapped its strategic rice reserve outside a natural disaster for the first time, and when part of that went on sale last weekend, immense, multi-hour queues formed at supermarkets around the country.</p> <!-- /wp:paragraph --> <!-- wp:paragraph --> <p>Japan’s long-standing efforts to protect domestic farmers from outside competition, including limiting imports of foreign rice, means solving the problem will not be easy, said Kazuhito Yamashita, a director at the Canon Institute of Global Studies and an expert on Japan’s rice market. </p> <!-- /wp:paragraph --> <!-- wp:paragraph --> <p>Decades of government policy have focused on shoring up rice prices to appease the critical rural vote, but rising prices have hit millions of urban families and made inflation a broader political problem for the government. Many criticise the government’s so-called set-aside programme, which attempted to raise rice prices by incentivising farmers not to grow. The policy only ended in 2018. “The set-aside programme was always the problem,” said Yamashita. “If Japan switched to subsidies, as in other countries, everything would change. Farmers would be able to afford to accumulate more farmland, lower their costs through scale and produce more rice.</p> <!-- /wp:paragraph --> <!-- wp:paragraph --> <p>Although Japan’s population of working farmers has fallen to less than 1 per cent of the total population from 4.4 per cent in 1976, they remain a powerful lobby. “The reduction in numbers has actually made it easier for the farmers to reach a unified political consensus,” said Kunio Nishikawa, a rice expert at Ibaraki University. “Japan’s electoral system means that a relatively large number of seats in the Diet are allocated to rural areas, reinforcing farmers’ political influence.” Ultimately, the declining farmer population will make a debate on wholesale agricultural policy reform easier, he added. “Even in the short term, because this rice crisis has become a topic of discussion for the entire nation, including consumers, I expect that agricultural policy reform will now progress,” he said. Given the size of the price increases, the government may feel more pressure to placate consumers, said Tobias Harris, a political analyst at Japan Foresight. “But clearly Ishiba and Koizumi are going to have to find some way of placating the producers ahead of the upper-house campaign.”</p> <!-- /wp:paragraph --> <!-- wp:paragraph --> <p>The knock-on effect of shortages and rising prices has been to create huge competition between the rice-buying co-operatives, which command roughly 40 per cent of the Japanese market, wholesalers and other large-scale buyers such as national restaurant chains and food producers. Many co-operatives approached farmers directly, offering prices that were locked in at about ¥26,000 for a 60kg bag. The co-operatives cannot now sell rice much below that, said analysts, without making a loss. In supermarkets across the country, meanwhile, prices of Japanese-grown grain are at record highs, shelves are empty or sparsely filled and many shops display signs suggesting cash-strapped customers seek cheaper carbohydrates from bread and noodles.</p> <!-- /wp:paragraph -->
